Spotify New Artist/Genre Recommender Optimizer 

Summary:
My recommender system optimizes spotify’s current recommender system in what I think is the most important part of music - exploration. I feel that the current system focuses too much on adding to a current playlist, and not enough on exploring new genres and finding new artists. 

Problem Statement:
I value the importance of exploring new genres and finding new upcoming artists. Imagine you are sitting and listening to your favorite pop song, but have been getting into guitar lately and want to start exploring the genre of rock music. It would be helpful to ease into the rock genre by first finding songs that are similar in attributes such as tempo and volume to those in your current playlist. When you navigate to the browse all section on spotify there are a variety of different genres to explore, however there are thousands of songs on display and you may not know where to start. In addition songs are recommended at the bottom of your current playlist, but it is only about six songs and the songs are more so in the same genre as your already existing playlist. I propose a recommender system where you can find songs similar to those on your playlist, but in the certain genre you want. Additionally, this system will be for the benefit of newer artists, as there will be a section where these artists are recommended and is a way to increase exposure for them. I feel this change will increase the amount of users Spotify will have, or retain users that would want this change. Even if the amount of users who value this is 1%, this might still be around 5,000,000 users and is well worth the change. In addition the exposure to new artists would hopefully cause new artists to come to spotify, and increase the amount of artists on the platform. 

Project:
Gathering the Data: To gather my data, I had to access the spotify API to get song data from the official spotify playlists and my own playlist which I custom made with 100 popular pop songs which I would be testing out my system on. To start, I had to create a developer account and was given a Client ID and Client Secret which I in turn could use to access the spotify API. I used the Spotipy library to help access the spotify API, and started exploring the different features. The data is in JSON format, so I developed some custom functions to be able to read in the important features and information I found to be useful. However when running the data, the problem I ran into was getting rate limited. After running into this problem once, I had to adjust my functions to be able to take in songs in batches of 50, and also use the time library with the time.sleep() command to be able to have time between requests. The data still ran for an extreme amount of time, and I was able to get about 10 thousand songs for my data, in addition to my 100 song playlist. 
Cleaning the Data, Visualizations, and Feature Engineering: Cleaning the data was not too hard, as when looking at the data I realized some duplicates existed and simply removed them. Additionally, when considering recommending artists for later, I realized that “Various Artists” was among the artists, and had to remove them just for the artist recommendations. My first visualization was an interactive plot to see the relationship between the amount of followers had and their popularity. I used this to gauge what artists should be considered for recommendations, and I felt as though follower count was a big part of this. Additionally, I noticed a very large assortment of genres, and wanted to visualize which were the most common, so I created a visualization for the 20 most popular genres. While this app can be expanded to encounter more genres, I felt as though the 20 most popular ones would be a good bet for the current size of the dataset. I then engineered a feature that would assign a number (1-20) to the songs that contained one of these popular genres, for example songs containing classical would receive a 1, rock would receive a 2, and so on. I was left with a column of tuples as most songs contained more than one genre. 
Content Based Filtering (For Recommendations): Now armed with my engineered column of tuples, I was able to use this to create a function that would give me a dataset with rows containing a digit of the user's choice, which represented a genre. With this, I was able to do content based filtering to create a vector of features of my 100 song playlist, and use cosine similarity to find the ten most similar vectors of features in the larger spotify playlist(filtered by genre). In the end, I was left with (for example in the genre of rock) 10 songs that had features that were closely related to those of my 100 song playlist. In addition, I was also able to recommend 5 artists in this same genre with the lowest follower count (relative to the data, this was still decently high). 

The WebApp: My final deliverable is a WebApp which is able to have a user select a playlist from their spotify account, and given this create a dataframe of their playlist. Next, after selecting a genre they are able to get two tables of recommendations: One of 5 newer artists and 10 songs in the selected genre. However, I was not super comfortable including the part where a user inputs their client secret and other spotify information (which is needed), so for the sake of the project I kept it limited to just my playlist. 




Link to Web App: https://spotify-new-genre-artist-recommender.onrender.com/
